Hello, and thanks for your interest in learning more about me.

My journey as a programmer began at age 9, when I helped my dad to launch a
[GeoCities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geocities) website dedicated to his
hobby of [v-drive boats](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/V-drive). While we
started with static content, interest grew quickly, and before long I found
myself dabbling in PHP and JavaScript in order to build interactive features
such as chat, guest book, and community forums.

After a few years of this (and once I turned 16, making real employment a legal
proposition), a family friend helped me to join a B2B credit reporting firm as a
junior programmer. In this role, I transitioned to the Microsoft tech stack (C#,
ASP.NET, SQL Server, etc.), which presented me with numerous interesting
opportunities for several years following.

When I first learned of Single-Page Application architecture circa 2012, I
immediately latched onto the idea and began seeking out opportunities where I
could focus primarily or exclusively on front-end development. While continuing
to leverage ASP.NET for traditional MPAs (as needed) and JSON APIs, I also
cobbled together a few SPA "frameworks" of my own before picking up Angular 1.
Much to the annoyance of my colleagues, I also became an early adopter of
TypeScript around that time.

I considered myself quite lucky when I joined a team building a new product with
the Angular 2 beta in early 2016. While other developers had complained about
the "rug pull" of an entirely new API, I was excited to learn something new and
hopefully better. Unfortunately, what I found instead was a framework that
changed so dramatically from one release to the next that product features
usually had to be rebuilt entirely from scratch: far too much change even for a
beta version IMHO. Aside from the obvious practical issues around this, I began
to realize that volatility is a symptom of complexity and bad design, and I knew
I had to find better technology, perhaps with a significantly different approach
than I had experienced up to that point.

Indeed, I did find an entirely different approach in Functional Programming,
first [Elm](https://elm-lang.org) and later
[PureScript](https://purescript.org). I have found PureScript in particular to
offer a degree of simplicity and power that easily justifies its admittedly
steep learning curve. As a result, most of my personal programming time is
dedicated to PureScript; and, even after several years as a hobbyist, I still
hold onto a dream of using it professionally at some point.

But for now, my day job remains focused on the best _mainstream_ technologies I
could find for web development, namely React and TypeScript. While learning FP
on my own time, I have been on a parallel professional journey toward the domain
of User Experience, and specifically Design Systems. Working in this area has
afforded me ample opportunity to sharpen design skills and learn directly from
my very talented UX colleagues. It also uniquely positions me outside of my
company's engineering organization, providing more space to learn, experiment,
and grow: I can pursue ideas that work, and easily discard the ones that don't.

This site is dedicated to sharing my findings with you, so that hopefully I can
offer you a more direct path to solving various problems I have already
encountered and explored. Please have a look around and enjoy, and thanks for
stopping by!
